---
layout: post
title: The Fibonacci sequence and Mammen (1993)'s distribution
date: 2024-02-04
permalink: /posts/mammen1993/
tags: [number theory, econometrics, bootstrap]
category: Econometrics
math: true
---

## Getting started with Fibonacci numbers

The Fibonacci sequence is ubiquitous in mathematics and nature. Sunflower seeds, pinecones, and even hurricanes resemble the Fibonacci pattern. The first ten numbers of the Fibonacci sequence are $$0,1,1,2,3,5,8,13,21,34$$. We can generate as many Fibonacci numbers as we want, since they nicely follow the following _linear recurrence_ relation,

$$
F_0 = 0, F_1 = 1, F_{n+1} = F_n + F_{n-1}\ \forall\ i \geq 1
$$

Interestingly, the closed-form expression for a Fibonnaci number is,

$$
F_n = \frac{\phi^n-\bar{\phi}^n}{\sqrt{5}}
$$

wherein $\phi=\frac{1+\sqrt{5}}{2}$ and $\bar{\phi}=\frac{1-\sqrt{5}}{2}$. Note that $\phi + \bar{\phi} = 1$ and $\phi\cdot \bar{\phi} = -1$. 

One approach to verify this formula is through first-order difference equation techniques. An application of strong induction is enough on our end.

*Proof.* The base case follows straightforwardly. As our induction hypothesis, suppose that the relation above holds for $n$ and $n-1$. Let us show that it also holds for $n+1$. By recurrence, we already know that $F_{n+1} = F_n + F_{n-1}$. Consequently,

$$
\begin{align}
F_{n+1} &= \frac{\phi^n-\bar{\phi}^n}{\sqrt{5}} + \frac{\phi^{n-1}-\bar{\phi}^{n-1}}{\sqrt{5}}\\
        &= \frac{\phi^n+\bar{\phi}^{n-1}}{\sqrt{5}} - \frac{\bar{\phi}^{n}+\bar{\phi}^{n-1}}{\sqrt{5}}\\
        &= \frac{\phi^{n-1}}{\sqrt{5}}(1+\phi) - \frac{\bar{\phi}^{n-1}}{\sqrt{5}}(1+\bar{\phi})\\
        &= \frac{\phi^n}{\sqrt{5}}(1 - \bar{\phi}) - \frac{\bar{\phi}^n}{\sqrt{5}}(1 - \phi)\\
        &= \frac{\phi^{n+1} - \bar{\phi}^{n+1}}{\sqrt{5}}
\end{align}
$$

which completes the inductive step and hence the proof. $$\square$$

## Residual bootstrap and Mammen (1993)'s distribution

To be completed.

## The result

**Lemma.** Let $$X$$ be a random variable that follows the two-point distribution of Mammen (1993), and $n$ any positive integer. Therefore, 

$$\mathbb{E}{X^n} = F_{n-1}$$

where $F_i$ is the $i-$th Fibonacci number.

*Proof.* Recall the definitions of $\phi$ and $\bar{\phi}$, and that $\phi\cdot \bar{\phi} = -1$. Operate accordingly on the two-point distribution of Mammen (1993) to infer that,

$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathbb{E}{X^n} 
	&= \bar{\phi}^n\left(\frac{1+\sqrt{5}}{2 \sqrt{5}}\right)+\phi^n\left(\frac{-1+\sqrt{5}}{2 \sqrt{5}}\right) \notag\\
	&=\frac{1}{\sqrt{5}}\left(\frac{(-1)^n}{\phi^{n-1}}+\phi^{n-1}\right)\notag\\
	&= \frac{1}{\sqrt{5}}\left((-1)^{2n-1} \bar{\phi}^{n-1}+\phi^{n-1}\right)\notag \\
    &= \frac{1}{\sqrt{5}}\left(\phi^{n-1} - \bar{\phi}^{n-1}\right)
\end{aligned}
$$

which is precisely the closed-form expression of the $(n-1)-$th Fibonacci number. $$\square$$

Thus, the above lemma implies that $\mathbb{E}{X} = 0$, $\mathbb{E}{X^2} = 1$, and $\mathbb{E}{X^{n+1}} = \mathbb{E}{X^{n}} + \mathbb{E}{X^{n-1}}\ \forall\ n \geq 2$.